---
layout: page
title: Syllabus
---

# Biology B02: Intro to biology via bioinformatics

Term 1, 2015, Thursday and Friday 8:30-10:00am

Instructor: Sasha Mikheyev

## Overview

The goal of this course will be to introduce key biological concepts
through problem solving and discussion. Given the short duration of the
course, this will not be a comprehensive introduction, focusing

*Why should I biologist take this course?* Although this course is meant
as an introduction to biology, its focus will be highly computational.
If you have limited experience with programming and bioinformatics, this
could be a good introduction to both, although you will have to put up a
lot of up-front investment into learning basic computer science, and
potentially working with computers

## Course schedule

Except for the timing of the labs, see below, the course schedule is
fairly fluid. I change it a bit from year to year, in part depending on
the interests of the students, and in part as a result of my ongoing
experimentation with teaching approaches and topics. The updated course schedule can be found [here]({{site.baseurl}}/schedule ).

## Course materials

Lecture notes and other materials will be available online via [a Dropbox link](http://tinyurl.com/q59j5wh). There is also a [course web page](http://mikheyevlab.github.io/B02-Fall-2015).

## Grading policy

Unfortunately for you, I am conducting a quixotic quest against grade inflation.
Fortunately for you, it doesn't matter at all in the long run. If you attend class, do the
homework, participate in discussion, and hand in an adequate final
project, you can expect to pass. **B** grade (80-90%) in the course. For
an **A** grade (90%+), you will be required to hand in a project of high
quality (see below on what that means). Missing assignments, or a lack
of participation, will rapidly decrease the **B** grade to a **C** grade
(70-80%) or even lower, so you are encouraged to keep up. Actually,
below a **C** there will be only a failing grade. Really, a **C** is
already a failing grade.

## Grade components (each worth 1/3 of the total course grade):

**I. Class participation**. The Tuesday lecture will
be dedicated to in-class discussion. You will be responsible for
preparing assignments by then, and being ready to discuss them in class.
The grade for this section will be determined by the quality and
quantity of your contribution, and will be at the instructor’s
discretion. Not saying anything gives you no points.

The instructor understands that English is not the first language of
many students. Although lack of English skills may prevent some of the
more spontaneous aspects of discussion, they can be overcome by
preparing thoughts, statements and formulations in advance. This means
that non-fluent English speakers may have to do more work, which is an
unfortunate fact of life in science. Your grade will not depend on how
well you say things, but what you say, and whether you say it.

Attendance and punctuality are integral to class participation. Your
grade will be severely penalized for lateness and for missing classes,
without prior excuse from the instructor. Each missed class will
discount your final participation grade, up to the total, by 4*^x^*^-1^
percent, where *x* is the number of missed classes. Arriving in class
more than 15 minutes late counts as a missed class, not being there at
the start counts as half a missed class. The system has a built-in
mulligan, so no *post hoc* excuses will be accepted. Any authorized
absences will have to be approved by the instructor at least two weeks
beforehand.

**II. Homework.** The homework should be turned in
on time, as it will be part of Tuesday’s discussion. You have 5 days to
do each major assignment, **all of which will be fairly labor-intensive,
so do them over the weekend, and don’t leave them until the last
minute**. No excuses for late homework will be accepted. Collaboration
between classmates is encouraged, but everyone will submit their own
code with a distinct implementation of the solution. There are a few
problems where coming up with fundamentally distinct solutions will be
difficult, but you should try to introduce your own twist.

The vast majority of the homework assignments will be from
Rosalind.info. They are actually really fun, but require a fairly heavy
investment into programming skills. In principle, you can learn all of
the required skills in the first couple of weeks of class, but it will
require *a lot of work*. However, you will be well-rewarded for your
effort. Please check out the web site and the homework assignments.

To do the assignments on Rosalind.info, you’ll need to enroll here.

**III. Lab exercises.** There will be two lab
activities aimed to illustrate basic ideas from genetics, and evolution
and to generate date for a next-generation sequencing-based project.
They are mandatory. Since the labs take a considerable amount of time to
set up, absences will not be excused under any circumstances.

**IV. Final project.** This is the most important
part of the course, other than following instructions, which separates
the **B**s from the **A**s. Each project will be done by a pair of
students, preferably pairing a biologist with a non-biologist.
